Next to the Amazon River, there actually
is a second gigantic hydrographic system
with the Parana and Uruguay River draining
1/5th of the remaining continent. But about
280 kilometers before these rivers discharge
into the ocean, the riverbanks suddenly widen
into an enormous horn before the waters
finally flow into the Atlantic Ocean.
This funnel shaped indent into the South American
coastline is called the Rio de la Plata and it
looks very different to pretty much any other
river’s delta. So what actually happened here?
It all started with a wide geological fault
that formed during the breakup of Gondwana,
which gave the structural framework for the notch
in the continental shelf. As tectonic activity
further shaped the land of South America, much of
the continent's runoff was eventually redirected
into this originally 2 km deep depression and
millions of tons of loose sediments from the
rivers then slowly got deposited within. By
now, the incoming sediments from the rivers
and tidal forces from the Atlantic have found
an equilibrium, giving the Rio de la Plata a
gentle gradient from 2 to a 20 meter depth
at the transition with the Atlantic Ocean.
Throughout these 280 kilometers, the Rio de
la Plata is separated into various zones with
completely different habitats along the way. At
the mouth of the rivers, low salinity levels of
around 2 PSU create a freshwater habitat which
slowly transitions to the mixed zone of brackish
water, where a distinct vertical salinity gradient
rises from the sea floor to the water surface,
and sediments are still heavily suspended
in the water, creating the characteristic
orange and brown tints. After passing
the Uruguayan capital of Montevideo,
the water depth drops to its deepest level, the
funnel opens up to its maximum width, and the
tidal push raises the salinity level to over 10
times the level that is measured in Buenos Aires.
Considering all of these characteristics, the Rio
de la Plata is actually quite the puzzle to the
scientific community which tries to make it fit
in with one of the standardized classifications
of hydrography. The most straightforward would
be calling it a river as the name suggests,
with the Spanish and Portuguese word Rio meaning
River in English. Looking at the overall geometry
and properties however it doesn’t really align
with what we would usually consider a river though.
Alternatives are the terms Bay which is defined
as a broad inlet of the sea where the land curves
inwards, a Marginal Sea which is a semi-enclosed
body of water adjacent to, and widely open to the
ocean, or an estuary which is that area of a
river mouth which is affected by sea tides.
While every definition has
some fitting aspects to it,
the debate probably won’t be settled anytime
soon but my personal favourite would be the
estuary since the brackish zone is such a
defining characteristic of the Rio de la Plata.
If you want to learn more about the hydrography of our planet
I have a whole playlist
covering the longest rivers right here,
or watch what YouTube thinks is best for
you here. See you in the next one, cheers.